<!-- title: Social Hour is Back! -->
Work on non-adaptive stuff. Lunch with Michela. She appreciates my defensive play against Oregon at Prez Day :)
Meeting with Noah! Good meeting. We talk about stuff with Divesh's students and then the non-adaptive stuff. Noah sees a way to finish the construction :D
Grab an iced coffee at Gimme. It's cheap and reallly good. Will get again. Read a bit more of that great random oracle paper. Then, Theory Tea. I'd told Sloan I couldn't give a talk (say no!) so we had an open problem day. Sloan, me, Jesse, and Mohit (a 2nd year) all presented some open problems. Jesse's was pretty fun.
Then, social hour!! It's back, with food! We basically all had our masks off in Gates 310, although it was split awkwardly with the masks-on, no-eating lounge where we used to have social hour. Really fun. Chatted with a bunch of people. Ended up going down to the baseball field and playing soccer with some randos. Very fun, felt like my first semester. THen went to ctown and barely had time to pound a beer at CTB before we decided to go to Zocalo. Took an uber with Jonathan Gabor and this guy Abhishek, put our name on the list, sat down on the floor of the mall and chatted. The rest showed up, and we had a great dinner. Ate half of a Combo Gordo and had a jumbo margarita. Chatted with Katy Blumer a bit about meditation (she got the book at my recommendation). Kat was there, everything seemed normal with her. Jonathan was enjoying being buzzed :) Ubered back home with Jonathan, after some philosophical discussion and goofy sparring in the mall parking lot. Back home, I took a long hot shower, wrote this log and hit it.
