<!--title: TL;DBlog -->
Met with Vinod this morning. Wore my blazer. Was a great meeting. Very cordial
and he had some promising sounding project ideas for me.
At the office, worked on submitting the FI paper to Crypto. Have a submission
now. Good lunch with Sloan. Tossed with Martin a bit, then we went to pick up my
car. Felt very tired but had some good conversation. Folks at Goodrich Auto
Works were very friendly. Didn't even ID me. Said my voice and Dad's voice were
distinctive and "easy to listen to", so they couldn't mistake me. Guy went
through about 200 distinct repairs that were made. I opened the hood so I could
see what he was talking about.
Not 10 minutes from Goodrich Google told me to pull off the highway and I was on
some dinky little road again. Not paying too much attention, I was going 40 in a
30 and went by a cop. I immediately realized my mistake and slowed down, but too
late! He jumped me. I had heard these small town cops were just looking for any
opportunity, and this one had finally got me. Apparently it was a school zone,
too (I hadn't seen any signage). I emphasized that I'd just gotten my car back,
I wasn't from around there... unfortunately I still got stuck with my first ever
moving violation, 40 in a 30 (he was sorta nice and left out the school zone
thing).
Tried to get the whole annoying incident and its likely impact on my insurance
rates out of my mind. Mostly enjoyed the rest of the ride back. Parked in Fall
Creek (Keeton free parking days are over), and illegally walked up the Gorge
Trail to CTown, where I chowed on an early half-dinner at Oishii Bowl.
Delicious!!
Worked for another hour at Gates, practiced some typing, then walked back to
Keeton. Played some good hoops at Noyes. These kids were real ballers, very
accurate shooters and athletic. Somehow I got stuck guarding a guy who didn't do
anything on offense, but this turned into a great opportunity--I poached off
"like a m**f**" (as Pete Deckerman would say) and got tons of help D's and some
transition points. The
paint was clogged and my knee was feeling still a little weird, so I avoided
drives (although I still rebounded well) and instead knocked in three or 4
threes, which was pretty awesome.
Aftder the game, walked to Cook and barely made it before 9 for the second half
of my dinner. A kid from the 2802 class I'd subbed in for was there and
recognized me. Sat with him and had a good conversation. Turns out he balls
too--added him to my chat.
Back at Keeton, took a long hot shower, did my rounds, called Izzy for a few
minutes, then wrote this log and hit it!
