The temptation to see everything as means to the end of Molochian competition is strong. It's often right, in defiance of intuition. For example, signalling is often the true motivation when a prosocial motivation is claimed (and seems obvious). "Group selection" seems to be a myth. Revealed dating preferences hew closely to evolutionary biology predictions. And almost all human endeavors position an individual to thrive in some community--actions that seem trivial (commenting in a group chat) or clearly altruistic (like hosting a social event) have clear rewards that make them effectively purposeful and self-interested. I'm much less confused now about why people act the way they do than I have ever been.

But this ruthless understanding of the purpose of our actions detracts, just a little bit, from the color and beauty of life. I'm not talking about the reality itself--that is what it is--but our view of it. In the worldview of Moloch, there are only mad-eyed relentless winners and the jaded rest of us; there are players we work and transact with, and NPCs we farm for social credit, cash, and dopamine. There is room for conceptual exploration and philosophizing, but this must be cashed out as cachet or actionable insight. There is certainly room for the expression of ourselves in grand efforts, but these efforts become mired in cynicism and are therefore harder to start pursuing. This view from the Tower of Moloch is not a natural human viewpoint; the trouble is that we have enough visibility to see it, enough time to realize it, and so much bullshit to cut through that we see no other option. And the splendor of life, its effortless majesty and sublime depth and bubbling aliveness, is lost.

The Molochian competitor is defined by the perfection of his equilibrium, the crushing fact that he lives on the Pareto frontier and no improvement is possible. But this equilibrium is easier to theorize about than it is to experience. We need the humility not to calculate all the consequences of our actions, the bravery to be guided by intuitive precepts with no utility-maximizing intepretation, the trustingness to fear fear and not consequences. We need to be reminded of our oldest freedom: we get to delight in an action or an idea, before the world gets a swing at it. Gregory Roberts wrote that as he was being tortured, he had his greatest epiphany: he was free to hate the men that tortured him, or to forgive them.

=== Random stuff ===

Nietzche: Defy the local equilibrium!
Venkat: Fight with mediocrity!
The Spencerian Dream: The equilibrium is a lie!

In some sense, it is better to live in the ignorance of believing that people act the way they do because they are fools, rather than in the knowledge of the razor-sharp competitive social instincts that they themselves are often ignorant of. True ignorance not being accessible, perhaps deep humility is the antidote.
